Project Description

This project gives educators a way to explore space science with their students and then to allow the students to engage their imagination about future space exploration. There is a collection of descriptions about various bodies in space, as well as examples of "what could happen" in the future. Students are able to create their own art to represent components of the visual representation, which are uploaded into the software and displayed when the planet is selected.

For pre-k through 2nd grade (beginner level), there are reading level appropriate descriptions of planets, the sun, asteroids belt, the moon and the ISS.  Lessons can include imaging what the planet looks like (including geographical features like volcanoes and mountains), the atmosphere, and the path a rocket ship might take to get there. Young student can think about what space ships might need to look like to land on these place and work together to think about the sorts of thing people and robots can do on these space bodies.

For 3-6 graders (advanced), there is an increase in the details in the description of the space bodies. Additionally, the advance levels include Ceres in the Asteroid belt, the Kuiper Belt and Eris and Pluto as representations of dwarf planets. There are links for students to read about planned and past missions. Teachers can have students create space missions, including thinking about what types of resources they might need, how they might engineer a mission, and what that would look like. This can include using the asteroid belt as a jumping off point for exploring the outer planets and using rogue asteroids and comets as potential things to hitch a ride on to save on the need for fuel to travel around the solar system. Additionally, social issues about long term space adventures are included. This includes how you would pick people for the mission, how you would create a new society on a planet, and how you would create rule, to integrate the social sciences into the mission.

Teachers are encouraged to bring in literature as a resource for students to help think creative about potential space missions. A short list is included, but teachers will be encouraged to give feedback on resources they are using to expand this in the future.
 
This project helps educators engage in interdisciplinary curriculum to explore space science with their students and allow students to engage their imagination about future space exploration. There are descriptions about various bodies in space, and examples of "what could happen" in the future. Students create art to represent components of the visual representation in the software. They are encouraged to create space missions, think about resources they might need, how to engineer a mission, and what that would look like.





Beginning Level

Exploring the Solar system

Beginner Teachers

Teachers can use this site to allow their students to become familiar with the planets, Earth’s moon, the space station and the asteroid belt. Using the easily read information, students can learn about some of each object’s features, draw pictures of the planets, and the class can create a journey through our interactive feature across the solar system. Teachers can upload the pictures and have them to be the visual images for the planets.

Lesson Plan Ideas
Starting our journey to the stars
“When we go on trips we have to get everything we need together first, like packing our bathing suit to go to the beach or sandwiches to go on a picnic.  Let’s decide we are going to spend 2 weeks on the moon instead of the beach. Remember to get to the 
moon we have to go into space, where there is no air or warmth or water. I want each
group to make a list of all the things we will need for our journey.” After students have
complete their lists - you can sit down and go over them. Did they cover the main
areas of air, water, food, clothes, etc.? What other interesting items would they pack?
Why would they want their pets, baseball gloves, soccer balls, toys? What would they
miss the most that could not make the trip? Why? 

      2.   What would our spaceship be like? If possible get a large coil of heavy twine or light 
weight rope. make several circles and squares of various sizes to represent sleeping areas, the kitchen area, bathroom and lab based on the size areas in the shuttle or space station. Get the kids to show how they might organize the area to get particular tasks done. “You can see that on our space ship we would not have very much room. How would you feel living in such a small area? How would you feel if this is 
the space you had for a year while we are heading to Mars? What could we do to make you happier on the trip?  

Potential reading resources
TIME for Kids X-Why-Z Space: Little Kids Ask. We Answer (2014) ISBN:1618931261
National Geographic Kids First Big Book of Space. Catherine Hughes (2012) ISBN: 1426310145
DK Readers L1: Rockets and Spaceships  Karen Wallace (2011) ISBN:0756672041
There's No Place Like Space: All About Our Solar System (Cat in the Hat's Learning Library. Tish Rabe (1999) ISBN: 0679891153




Content Resource for website

Sun (Sol)
Description: The Sun is a star.
Location; The center of our solar system
General Information: It gives light and heat to the solar system. It’s size and gravity keeps the planets in orbit in their places.

Mercury 
Location: 1st planet from the sun
Descriptions: (Terrestrial Planet) - Mercury is the smallest planet, and the closest planet to the Sun. It’s 1−173 °C or −280 °F at night  and 7427 °C or 800 °F during the day. that’s really cold or really hot!

Venus 
Location:Venus is the second closest to the sun
Descriptions: (Terrestrial Planet) - It is called Earth’s “Sister Planet” because of its size, mass, and closeness from the sun. Venus is the hottest planet. It’s 900 degrees on the surface of Venus. 

Earth 
Location:3rd Planet from the sun.
Descriptions:(Terrestrial Planet) –  Earth is home to 10-14 million species of life, and is the only known planet that sustains life. China is working on a new space station for 2016. They just invited other nations to join them. 

International Space Station
Location: Orbiting the Earth
Description: (Space station) - The only space station with people living on it right now. It circles around the earth 16 times each day. 

Moon
Location: orbiting Earth
Description: (Satellite) - The only satellite of planet Earth. It takes 28 days for it to go from full moon to new to back to full moon. It changes shape because the earth’s shadow covers. It doesn’t produce light, but reflects the light from the Sun.  

Mars 
Location: Fourth planet from the Sun
Descriptions:(Terrestrial Planet) – it is the second smallest planet. It has a similar tilt to the Earth and therefore experiences similar seasons. it’s red because there is iron in the dirty that rusted, turning it red. There is a mountain on Mars that can look like a face, but its really just a mountain. 
	Missions:
MarsOne 
wants to send a one way manned trip to Mars in the next 10 years
NASA
wants to have a colony on Mars.. eventually. 20 year goal

Asteroid Belt-
Location: between Mars and Jupiter
Descriptions: It’s known as the main asteroid belt and consists of many different items and sizes. In January of 2014 scientist detected water Vapor on Ceres (which is the largest object in the belt).

Jupiter
Location:Jupiter is the 5th planet from the Sun
Descriptions: (Gas Giant) It is made up mostly of Hydrogen and Helium. It has a big storm that has been blowing for 300 years. It is the biggest planet. If you put 11 earths next to each other, that would be how wide Jupiter is. 

Saturn
Location: Saturn is the 6th planet from the Sun 
Description: (Gas Giant) Saturn has SIXTY TWO moons! It is best known for the beautiful rings that surround the planet. If you had a large enough pool of water, Saturn would float. This is because it is less dense than water (that is how close the atoms are together - Earth is the most dense)

Uranus
Location: Uranus is the 7th planet from the Sun
Description: (Gas Giant) Uranus is an Ice Giant. While all the other planets spin around like a spinning top, Uranus got knocked over and spins around on its side. it also has a very small ring, like Saturn.

Neptune
Location: Neptune is the 8th planet from the Sun 
Description: (Gas Giant) Farthest planet from the sun. Neptune's atmosphere has active and visible weather patterns and the strongest wind in the solar system.It has a great dark spot, similar to Jupiter’s Red spot. 


Advanced Level

Advanced Teachers (4-6 grade)
This is a great opportunity for teachers to integrate literature and science. Using our site of the solar system and the knowledge that is available about past and future missions, solar system object information, readings, students can imagine how they would plan a mission to a planet, an asteroid, or one of the many moons in our solar system. Teachers should encourage students, in teams or as individuals, to think about what they would need to do to make the trip, where they might stop to get supplies, what they might need to bring, and what issues they might encounter along the way.

Teachers might encourage students to read fiction and nonfiction books about space missions in order to think creatively about how they might plan a mission.
 

Lesson Plan Ideas

1)  When we head to the stars, our space on board the craft will be limited. Each person needs approximately two liters of drinking water every day to replace the fluids we lose through sweat, urine and breathing. We can use up to another 80 gallons a day washing clothes and dishes, bathing, brushing teeth, and flushing toilets. Water weighs about 8 pounds a gallon. So most of us need 640 pounds of water a day. If we have a crew of 10 and we are going to be traveling for 1 year (365 days)  you can see how taking enough water will not be possible. So, what are we going to do? We need to start thinking about living in a closed system. We will only have what we take with us on the mission. For this lesson have students research, design and build a terrarium. Once it is sealed students can observe how a closed system uses the most of what resources are placed within it. Daily observations and periodic discussions would bring a sense how important creating a system for the ship would be. Scenarios could revolve around the time it would take to journey to the moons of Jupiter or the long term colonization of Mars.

2)  On any trip into space an important question will be - what’s for dinner? And breakfast and lunch? What will the crew eat along the way? This would be a great opportunity to brainstorm and research what astronauts eat during missions. Students could build a solar dehydrator and learn about removing water (and reusing it).  They can experiment with growing edible plants in soil versus water and begin to understand how to grow the food needed in small areas. They may want to explore how to balance our nutritional needs with food that makes us feel good. Discussions should also include the cultural and religious components we hold around food. For example if certain foods are part of a religious tradition like matzo during Passover, should that be included in what we take or grow? Scenarios could revolve around short term trips to Mars and long-term missions to mine the asteroid belt. 

3)   In addition to food and water, perhaps the next most important question is about how people are going to get along on these long journeys. Imagine spending years with a group in a space the size of a couple school buses. We humans are a complicated species. We have different ways of behaving, for example do you eat dinner with a fork, your fingers, or chopsticks? There are a thousand different questions to be discussed on how we will treat each other. If you like to play your music really loud and I hate your music, what do we do? How can we sit down and decide how all of these issues will be handled? Students will have the chance to negotiate rules of conduct, which decisions should be handled by the group or the captain, how will folks with different personal, political, or religious beliefs live together in peace. Scenarios could focus long range trips like visiting the outer planets or long-term colonies on the moon.     

Potential reading resources

1)  A Child’s Introduction to the Night Sky: The Story of the Stars, Planets, and Constellations -- and How You Can Find Them in the Sky. Michael Driscoll (2004) ISBN 157912366X
2) The Everything Kids Astronomy Book: Blast into outer space with stellar facts, intergalactic trivia, and out-of-this-world-puzzles. Kathi Wagner and Sheryl Racine (2008) ISBN 1598695444
3) George’s Secret Key to the Universe. Lucy and Stephen Hawking (2009) ISBN:1416985840

Content Resource for website

Sun (Sol)
Description: The Sun is a star.
Location; The center of our solar system
General Information: It gives light and heat to the solar system. Its size and gravity keeps the planets in orbit in their places. The sun is composed of a gaseous plasma. The light and heat given off are from the thermonuclear fusion, which converts, hydrogen into Helium. Chemically, about three quarters of the Sun's mass consists of hydrogen, whereas the rest is mostly helium, and much smaller quantities of heavier elements, including oxygen, carbon, neon and iron. Sunlight is white. The sun is 5,778 K.
Missions:
http://www.planetary.org/explore/space-topics/space-missions/missions-to-study-the-sun.html
The first satellites designed to observe the Sun were NASA's Pioneers 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9, which were launched between 1959 and 1968. These probes orbited the Sun at a distance similar to that of Earth, and made the first detailed measurements of the solar wind and the solar magnetic field. Pioneer 9 operated for a particularly long time, transmitting data until May 1983.
 In 1980, the Solar Maximum Mission was launched by NASA. This spacecraft was designed to observe gamma rays, X-rays and UV radiation from solar flares during a time of high solar activity and solar luminosity.
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory.
 


Mercury
Location: closest to the sun
Descriptions: (Terrestrial Planet) - Mercury is the smallest planet, and the closest planet to the Sun. It’s 1−173 °C or −280 °F at night and 7427 °C or 800 °F during the day. that’s really cold or really hot!
Number of Satellites: 0
Missions: Messenger Missions http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/messenger/main/
	      BepiColumbo http://sci.esa.int/bepicolombo/
Mariner 10 Missions (talks you through some of the issues with going to Mercury)

Venus 
Location: second closest to the sun
Descriptions: (Terrestrial Planet) - Venus is the second closest to the sun. It is considered Earth’s “Sister Planet” because of its size, mass, and proximity from the sun. Venus is actually the hottest planet. Its 900 degrees on the surface of Venus.
Number of Satellites: 0
Missions http://www.planetary.org/explore/space-topics/space-missions/missions-to-venus-mercury.html 
HAVOC:http://sacd.larc.nasa.gov/branches/space-mission-analysis-branch-smab/smab-projects/havoc/ 
 
Earth 
Location: Earth is the is the third closest to the sun
Descriptions: (Terrestrial Planet) – Earth is home to 10-14 million species of life, and is the only known planet that sustains life. China is working on a new space station for 2016. They just recently extended an invitation to other nations to join them. It is not yet known if America was among the invited nations.
Number of Satellites: 1- The Moon
 
International Space Station
Location: Orbiting the Earth
Description: (Space station) - The only space station with people living on it right now. It circles around the earth 16 times each day.
 


Moon
Location: orbiting Earth
Description: (Satellite) - The only satellite of planet Earth. It takes 28 days for it to go from full moon to new to back to full moon. It changes shape because the Earth’s shadow is falling across it. The moon doesn’t produce any light, it just reflects the light from the Sun. Several manned missions to the moon allowed us to collect rock and soil samples and test a variety of technologies.

Mars
Location: Fourth planet from the Sun
Descriptions:(Terrestrial Planet) – it is the second smallest planet. It has a similar tilt to the Earth and therefore experiences similar seasons. It has a thin atmosphere and ice at the poles, making it one of the greatest potentials for colonization. It’s day is about the same length as earths. 
	Number of Satellites- 2 - Phobos (fear) and Deimos (panic) 
Days to orbit the sun - 687
Future Missions
MarsOne
wants to send a one way manned trip to Mars in the next 10 years:	
	http://www.mars-one.com/
NASA
Wants to have a colony on Mars.. Eventually. 20 year goal: http://quest.nasa.gov/qna/research/marscolony.html

 Asteroid Belt
Location: It’s known as the main asteroid belt and consists of many different items and sizes. In January of 2014 scientist detected water Vapor on Ceres (which is the largest object in the belt).
Future Missions
 
Ceres
Location- Asteroid Belt
Description (Dwarf Planet) – Largest object in the Asteroid belt. Ceres comprises approximately one third of the mass of the asteroid belt. It is the only dwarf planet in the inner Solar System and the only object in the asteroid belt known to be unambiguously rounded by its own gravity. The surface is probably a mixture of water ice and various hydrated minerals such as carbonates and clay. In January 2014, emissions of water vapor were detected from several regions of Ceres. There are indications that Ceres may have a tenuous atmosphere and water frost on the surface
Missions: The robotic NASA spacecraft Dawn entered orbit around Ceres on 6 March 2015
The Chinese Space Agency is designing a sample retrieval mission from Ceres that would take place during the 2020s
 
 Jupiter
Location: Jupiter is the 5th planet from the Sun
Descriptions: (Gas Giant) - It is made up mostly of Hydrogen and Helium. It has a big storm that has been blowing for 300 years, called the Great Red Spot. It is the largest planet in the solar system. it is 121 time larger than Earth. the atmosphere is mostly hydrogen and helium. 
Number of Satellites: 67, including the 4 moon seen by Galileo Galilei in 1610 -Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto
Years to Orbit the Sun:
Rings:
Missions: satellites Pioneer and Voyager have flown by Jupiter
NASA’s Juno Mission http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/juno/main/ 
Mission to Europa http://www.space.com/24926-nasa-europa-mission-2015-budget.html 
http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/missions/europa-clipper/ 
 
Saturn
Location: Saturn is the 6th planet from the Sun
Description: (Gas Giant) Saturn has SIXTY TWO moons! It is best known for the beautiful rings that surround the planet. If you had a large enough pool of water, Saturn would float. This is because it is less dense than water (that is how close the atoms are together - Earth is the most dense)
Number of Satellites: 62, including Titan, which is large than Mercury and Pandora and Prometheus, which keeps the rings in place, called shepherd moons
Years to Orbit the Sun: 29
Rings: yes. most prominent rings in the solar system
Future Missions:
 
Uranus
Location: Uranus is the 7th planet from the Sun
Description: (Ice Giant) Uranus is an Ice Giant. While all the other planets spin around like a spinning top, Uranus got knocked over and spins around on its side, sort of. it also has a very small ring, like Saturn. It is the coldest planet in the system. it’s 3 billion kilometers from the Sun. 
Number of Satellites- 27, which are all names after Shakespeare characters
Years to Orbit the Sun- 84
Rings- 13
Missions- Voyager 2 went by in 1986. 
Uranus Pathfinder  http://www.mssl.ucl.ac.uk/planetary/missions/uranus/ 
 
Neptune
Location - Neptune is the 8th planet from the Sun
Description - (Ice Giant) Farthest planet from the sun. Neptune's atmosphere has active and visible weather patterns and the strongest wind in the solar system, with recorded wind speeds as high as 2,100 kilometers per hour (1,300 mph). It has a great dark spot, similar to Jupiter’s Red spot. These weather patterns are driven by the strongest sustained winds of any planet in the Solar System. It is the fourth-largest planet by diameter and the third-largest by mass. It is also the densest among the gas giants. Neptune was the first and only planet found by mathematical prediction rather than by empirical observation. Its atmosphere is mostly hydrogen and helium. It contains a higher proportion of "ices" such as water, ammonia, and methane ,because of its great distance from the Sun. Neptune's outer atmosphere is one of the coldest places in the Solar System, with temperatures at its cloud tops approaching 55 K (−218 °C).
Number of Satellites - 14, which are names after minor Greek water deities.
Year to Orbit the Sun - 164.8 
Rings - 5
Missions https://solarsystem.nasa.gov/missions/profile.cfm?Sort=Target&Target=Neptune&MCode=Voyager_2 
There was a neptune orbiter proposed. 
 
Kuiper Belt
Location: It is the region of space beyond the planets of our system. 
Description: It is similar to the asteroid belt found closer to the sun, but it’s objects are mainly made of ice instead of rock and metal. 
Missions: Launched in 2006, New Horizons will arrive at Pluto July 14, 2015 and continue on the explore other bodies in the Kuiper Belt.
Major Objects: There are 3 officially recognized dwarf planets inside the belt along with another 100,000 KBOs (Kuiper Belt objects).
 
Pluto
Location: Located in the Kuiper Belt on the edge of our solar system
Description: Primarily made of rock and ice. It is only ⅙ the mass of the Moon and ⅓ its volume. It was removed from the list of planets in xxx. Pluto is now the second most massive dwarf planet circling our sun and the largest body in the Kuiper Belt.
Number of Satellites: 5 known moons
Years to orbit our sun: 247
Missions: The New Horizon probe will visit Pluto on July 14, 2015 and will take detailed measurements and images.

Eris
Location: Eris starts its journey outside of Neptune and then takes a path outside of our solar system’s region before returning. 
Description: Most massive dwarf planet in our solar system. It is the 9th largest body know to circle our sun.
Years to circle sun: 557 
Number of Satellites One known moon - Dysnomia


Other vocabulary that will be defined for the two levels (where appropriate):
Gravity			Dark energy		Worm holes					Orbits				Planet			Star
Asteroids			Energy		NASA			
Meteors			Vaccum		Space Station	
Comets			Weightless		Launches		
Transportation: shuttle, rover
